---
layout: post
title:  "Should AI replace the humble fax machine in the doctor's office?"
author: sandy
categories: [ AI, healthcare ]
image: assets/images/2023-08/healthcare-is-keeping-the-fax-machine-alive.png
---
VC firm Andressen Horowitz recently published an interesting [article](https://a16z.com/2023/08/02/where-will-ai-have-the-biggest-impact-healthcare/) on the newest AI technologies that will have a big impact on healthcare.  My first reaction was 'Haven't we seen this before?' and 'What makes things different *this* time around?'  While I see great potential, I remain cautious for AI to have as much impact in a field where human connection is vital.

## Don't give me more software, give me more productivity

I love new technology.  I love it because it makes me more productive.  As I was booking holiday travel recently, I realized how *easy* it has become to do things on my own - on my own time, in my own way.  No calling a travel agent to arrange a trip.  No pondering if I could have found a better deal with another agent.  I don't think you'll find too many people who will complain about the convenience this provides (sans, the Uber driver who cancels my ride because I live in a congested island).      

What's funny is that we are using new software all the time.  Everytime a new app comes out, we can easily download it and check it out.  Its integrated seamlessly into our everyday life; that is, it makes my life better.

Healthcare seems to have gotten it backwards, as every new healthcare software solution promises more productivity, but instead does the opposite.  EHRs require more clicks for physicians.  For patients, my personal favorite (annoyance) is when I am asked to fill out insurance information in the EHR before my next appointment, even though I provided it at the previous appointment.  Better yet is when I am asked to fill out the same insurance information - on paper - in the doctor's office.  So, why bother filling out anything online?

That's not productivity.

There is an allure to the statement that instead of healthtech companies developing new software, they'll develop ”AI ‘people’ who are cheap, fast, cheerful and empathic.”  However, if I'm a patient, I want a human being to help me feel better.  The thought of a machine having perceived empathy discounts any reason to see a doctor at all.

A good piece of software is one that will handle the simple things like document capture, reconciliation, etc.  I agree wih the article that the first revolution will be non-clinical use cases.  If AI can help us get past that hurdle, then I think we have achieved productivity.

## Marginal improvements are not worth the effort?

I don't agree with this statement.  Having worked in high-tech technical roles over the last decade, I have seen the evolution of more advanced computing and its capabilities.  Working in big data and cloud platforms have shown the ability to create powerful solutions with seemingly limitless compute power.  I may even argue that cloud solutions and the infrastructure that powers them are bringing forth that 10x value that is meant to displace former technologies.

Hence, replace the humble fax machine.

Yet, I am wary about moving at that pace in healthcare.  On the one hand, cloud computing offers the benefit to process billions of data points for, say, genomic sequencing or population health management.  The article is correct in that AI will require more compute resources due to algorithm complexity and compute resources required.  There would be more insights, more personalization, more productivity.  

But there could also be a cloud outage, a malicious entity that wants to conduct a cybersecurity attack on a hospital, a patient record that ends up in the wrong hands.

THere's nothing wrong with marginal improvements.  Is it better to misdiagnose 1 patient or 1000 patients?  A small error allows time to investigate and course correct.  Of course, we should aim for technologies that can bring us more value, more quickly.  But at what cost to human life?


## A world-class AI doctor for everyone, everywhere

Going back to my first point of good technology that works seamlessly and increases productivity, it would be amazing to have a doctor that knows everything at my fingertips.  There are some models already out there that attempt this - Livongo by Teladoc as an example.  However, even if it has been covered insurance (so the service is at no cost), I haven't really used it unless out of necessity.  

I fear that an AI doctor might sit as one of those unused apps on my phone.  Having a virtual doctor just doesn't replace the interaction I would like to have with a real human being.

However, I like the idea of AI enabling earlier diagnosis - this is one use case that I believe will see increased adoption rapidly. 

## Conclusion

I appreciated this insightful and hopeful article for the future of healthcare.  However, there are many barriers to the adoption that the authors seek to enlist here.  My hope 
