---
layout: post
title:  "Emerging tech's value in a time of healthcare verticalization"
author: sandy
categories: [ healthcare, EHR, chatGPT ]
image: assets/images/2024-01/shutterstock_170931503_license_resize.png
description: "Technology's value in a time of healthcare verticalization"
featured: false
hidden: false
---

Continuing on from my previous post on emerging tech's value in healthcare, I was intrigued to review EHR adoption across other countries.  As I wrote about in a previous [post](https://slsu0424.github.io/switchover-disruptions-true-cost-ai-scribe), EHRs are still a painpoint for its users, despite the fact that [96% of hospitals](https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/ehrs/96-of-us-hospitals-have-ehrs-but-barriers-remain-to-interoperability-onc-says.html) have them.  Although its been a number of years since I studied EHRs in an academic setting, I was intrigued by the ability to mine the data using generative AI.  But is this emerging tech significant enough to make a meaningful impact?

## EHR use in the US vs. abroad

A 2020 JAMA [report](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/2774129) set out to compare clinician usage of EHRs in the United States and in other countries.  The report studied EHR metadata of 371 health systems in the US and abroad.  I will focus on the paper's key findings and discussion, and its implications from a technology perspective.

Key findings on US clinicians:
1. Spent more time per day using the EHR
2. Received more system-generated messages
3. Wrote a higher proportion of automatically generated notes
4. Spent more time using the EHR after hours

Discussion:
1. Recent [research](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/quality-u-s-healthcare-system-compare-countries/) has shown that US-based health care organizations are not better than their neighboring countries in most process quality measures during care delivery.  Its unlikely that information technology could help improve these measures significantly.
2. The [Meaningful Use](https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/medicare-medicaid/meaningful-use-electronic-health-record-ehr-incentive) incentive program mandated both secure messaging with patients and electronic prescribing.  This has meant additional time spent by US clinicians on handling messages.
3. EHR functions, such as e-prescribing, may improve safety and save time in the care delivery process.  This was less likely to be observed among non-US clinicians, who may write prescriptions manually.
4. US clinicians used EHRs in different ways that are driven by unique workflows or policy.  Factors such as a multipayer billing environment and Meaningful Use requirements may contribute to clinicians overdocumenting to ensure reimbursable claims or to prevent malpractice lawsuits.  

## Considerations for the technologist

Its important to be wary of solutions looking for a problem.  In my experience, the next big tech idea in healthcare does not always fix problems.  Oftentimes, it introduces new ones.  There has to be a clear and compelling problem that technology can actually solve, and one with a demonstratable ROI.  

The administrative burden of EHRs in the US is an area ripe for disruption.  The text summarization capabilites of LLMs make them a compelling solution for today's EHR woes.  I believe there is a fit in the clinician's workflow, but there are many other factors that will limit how much change this technology can achieve.  

In our healthcare system, there are significant government interventions and existing workflows that may limit the technology's potential. In fact, Meaningful Use has been criticized by phyisicans - https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7647027/#:~:text=The%20federal%20meaningful%20use%20%28MU%29%20program%20was%20aimed,of%20the%20MU%20program%20for%20practicing%20family%20physicians.


## Conclusion
This paper was insightful to understand the differences in EHR adoption in the US and abroad.  In particular, I was surprised that clinicians in other countries were not subject to the same level of scrutiny in filing medical claims, highlighting the need for change at the policy level.  Thus, despite whatever newest technology is available, there needs to be additional changes to how healthcare is regulated in the US.



## References
+ <>