---
layout: post
title:  "Reflecting on 1 year with Health Tech Bytes"
author: sandy
categories: [ healthcare, writing ]
image: assets/images/2024-07/javier-allegue-barros-unsplash_resize.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

Lately, I have reading a lot about environmental factors affecting healthcare, or what is more commonly known social determinants of health (SDoH).  These include one's financial situation, social circles, and the places they live, work, and play.  Interestingly, I came across a recent paper which highlights these non-clinical factors as playing a much bigger role in an individual's health outcome than utilizing healthcare services themselves.  What if we lived in a world where our healthcare services were optimized for the sickest of the sick? In this post, I take a look at our government's initiative for health and promising research using LLMs to mine for SDoH from EHRs.

## White House Healthy People 2030
Every decade since 1979, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) puts out an iteration of the Health People Initiative.  This initiative aims to create a healthier nation and track data-driven outcomes to measure progress towards that goal.  In 2020, HHS released the 5th iteration - Healthy People 2030.  

By background, SDOH has remained a core concept of the Healthy People since its inception, with its definition and importance evolving over time.  According to [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8478310], Healthy People 2020 included a goal to address social and physical environments that influence health - a clear commitment to reducing health inequities.  SDOH were defined as “the conditions in the environments where people are born, live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that affect a wide range of health, functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes and risks.”

Here are the 5 social determinants of health domains used in Healthy People:

[!][SDOH](/assets/images/2024-08/sdoh.png){:.centered}

So what's new for 2030?  SDOH is now a [core priority](https://odphp.health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas), with health disparaties brought to light during the COVID-19 pandemic.  According to the [Journal of Public Health Management & Practice](https://journals.lww.com/jphmp/Fulltext/2021/11001/Healthy_People_2030__A_Call_to_Action_to_Lead.5.aspx), the pandemic highlighted how many Americans fell into a high-risk category for COVID-19 due to underlying health conditions.  Not surprisingly, this is a reflection of disparities in health, access to care, and underlying social determinants.


## Mining EHRs for SDOH evidence
This is an exciting time for AI and SDoH.  I found a few research papers that explored the use of large language models (LLMs) with social determinants of health. For example, this study published in [NPJ Digital Medicine](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.063540) explored extracting SDOH from free text in EHRs and the role of synthetic clinical text for improving the extraction.  The results indicate that fine-tuned language models (i.e., retraining pre-trained models for a specialized task) were capable of extracting SDoH from clinical text.  

This is a promising application of LLMs, as this could improve real-world evidence of SDoH.  


 and not because a shiny new technology is finally making headway in healthcare.  Instead, I would argue that there is increased focus on broader issues *outside* of technology, but technology can certainly be an enabler.  Let's take the case of a research study out of Emory University, where 

## Conclusion
