---
layout: post
title:  "Relevance of transformer architectures in healthcare"
author: sandy
categories: [ healthcare, EHR, AI ]
image: assets/images/2024-03/iStock-1025882206_license.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

As I was wrapping up my last article, I realized I wanted to further explore transformer architectures.  Specifically, I wanted to understand why transformers have become so popular in healthcare.  As some recent studies[] have made it into the media highlighting limitations of LLMs (transformer-based application for NLP tasks), I think its worthwhile to ask: Are they truly superior to their predecessors?  What are the applicable use cases?  In this post, I will take a deeper look into healthcare applications using transformers, and evaluate if they will prove transformative for healthcare.

## Transformers overview
There are already plenty of great resources to learn about transformer architectures, and I will not go into the details here.  However, I found this [tutorial](https://towardsdatascience.com/illustrated-guide-to-transformers-step-by-step-explanation-f74876522bc0) particularly intuitive in understanding transformers, and it serves as a good backdrop in understanding their usefulness in healthcare. 

At a high-level, transfomers make use of the attention mechanism, which allows .  Here is a nice visual of how attention mechanism works:

[image]

Next, let's visualize how transformers best RNN and LTSM architectures.  



## Limitations of existing NLP models in healthcare
I'm sure we can now see how existing NLP architectures 

## Experiments using transformers in healthcare
Now that we have understood the how transformers have succeeeded over previous NLP architectures.


## Why are transformers so powerful in healthcare?

## Conclusion

## References
+ <https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/how-transformers-work>
+ https://towardsdatascience.com/illustrated-guide-to-transformers-step-by-step-explanation-f74876522bc0
+ https://dzone.com/articles/a-deep-dive-into-the-transformer-architecture-the