---
layout: post
title:  "Exploring LLMs for Social Determinants of Health (SDoH)"
author: sandy
categories: [ healthcare, AI, ChatGPT]
image: assets/images/2024-07/javier-allegue-barros-unsplash_resize.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

I've been finding myself using ChatGPT as a daily habit, and it has become an indespensible part of everyday life much like the cell phone.  *I just don't even give it a second thought*.  As probably most frequent users of ChatGPT, I've been impressed with how natural the conversation flows - much like talking to a friend.  Even more so, is its ability to explain its reasoning to me.  A thought came to mind was 'What would this be like for someone in the healthcare field?  As I've been studying generative AI systems, I wanted to explore the concept of Chain-of-Thought prompting.  I came across this topic in one of my earlier posts, and its worth a revisit considering its potential impacts for healthcare.

## What are the origins of chain-of-thought? 
My research pointed me to a landmark paper published in 2022 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903
https://www.alexanderthamm.com/en/blog/chain-of-thought-prompting/

What's interesting is that as humans, we naturally gravitate and adapt to such technologies over time. 

## CoT prompting considerations for healthcare

## Conclusion
In this post, I reviewed SDoH as a key set of non-clinical factors affecting health outcomes.  Such health disparities were brought to light during the COVID-19 pandemic, and became an area of focus for the White House Healthy People 2030 initiative.  Recent AI advances, particularly LLMs, have demonstrated the capability to effectively mine data sources for SDoH evidence.  I remain bullish that these technologies can provide better insights and tailored treatments for at-risk patients.