---
layout: post
title:  "Reflecting on one year of writing Health Tech Bytes"
author: sandy
categories: [ healthcare, AI, ethics, regulation ]
image: assets/images/2024-05/tingey-injury-law-firm-resize.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

June was a busy month, but I wanted to share a reflection once I hit one year of writing my blog, Health Tech Bytes.  In this post, I share my motivation for writing, important lessons I learned along the way, and what's next for year two.  I hope my journey is helpful for anyone looking for fresh ways to educate themselves, teach others, or find something they are passionate about.


## Goal
I had toyed around with the idea of starting a blog for some time, but I never found the time to do it.  I now see why - blogging is a lot of work.  Its not for the faint of heart, so its important to feel personally motivated to do it.  For me, I was learning a lot of new cool technology over the years, but I was also frustrated that I never had a chance to go really deep into any of it.  I often felt in operator mode, and there was a part of me that wanted to nerd out a bit, and just spend time learning, thinking, asking.  I felt that if I could write about it, and communicate it to a novice, then I would feel a sense of accomplishment.


## Lessons learned:
I wanted to document some of the things I discovered in this journey, some of which were surprising and fun, and others that were downright challenging.  Here are the top 10 things that come to mind:

### 1. Owning content  
One of the initial dilemmas I came across was where to host my writings.  I knew LinkedIn, Medium, and Substack were popular places for people to share their thoughts and blogs, but they didn't really own their content.  I personally did not like this idea, because what if one of these sites were to disappear?  I also wanted more control over the look and feel for my content.  Thus I chose to host my site on GitHub, using GitHub pages and a Jekyll plug-in as a front-end.  This took a bit of work in re-learning web development, but I've been happy with the results.

### 2. Time and research, research, research  
This was a big one for me.  Writing a blog post takes a lot of time, and a lot of research.  It takes a different set of skills to identify the topic you want to write about, and then go find the information to substantiate it.  The research part was interesting, because I often found myself digging around in LinkedIn and business journals to academic research papers and PhD blogs.  The next task was synthesizing this information and distilling it down for the everyday reader.  This was especially challenging for technical topics.

### 3. Less is more  
Did you know that a blog post that reads between 5-7 minutes has the highest level of engagement (link)?  This was a real challenge because this required being able to explore a topic with enough depth, without completely losing your audience.  There were some posts I would have loved to expand in detail, but it was a deliberate choice to keep it consumable.  I ended up having to delegate further discussion in a link or leave it out completely. 

### 4. Tech tutorials are hard, but there is no substitute for hands-on learning
Perhaps my least favorite was writing the technical tutorials.  But don't get me wrong, I still like coding.  Interestingly enough, I initially started with technical writings for the first 6 months or so, before switching over to more business-oriented writings the last 6 months.  I found that the coding part was easy, but it was way harder to explain it.  Along with point 3, being able to convey key concepts using fewer words was more difficult than I realized.

### 5. Finding your voice  
One thing I had often read with writing is that the author eventually finds their voice.  I had no idea what this meant initially, but I suppose its the idea that as you continue to write, you will recognize that you have a certain style in how you come across in your writing.  Are you more creative or demure?  More business-oriented or research-focused?  For me, I liked to err on the side of being as grounded as possible, and would often find myself researching to make sure any claim I made was substantiated.

### 6. The post I learned the most from  
When I survey the different types of topics I wrote about this past year, I ended up learning the most from my post on word embeddings.  It turned out to be my longest post (14 minutes to read), and quite possibly the most annoying one to develop.  I remember spending up to 2 weeks putting this together.  It really forced me to understand one of the key building blocks of deep learning frameworks.  As a result, I feel I have a firmer understanding of why AI has become so powerful in recent years.  

### 7. Sources of inspiration  
I was actually surprised that I found a lot of inspiration in music.  One would think that reading other blogs would serve that purpose, but they did not.  I really identified with the creative process involved in making music, which I would often find in videos.  What you often see in a final performance is the result of many hours of creating, practicing, and revising behind the scenes.  There is also something so beautiful about creating something from nothing.   

### 8. Surprises during the writing process  
There were some writings that went by fast (like this one).  It can be a straight divulge of thoughts in your head.  But there were others that were painfully slow, where I dreaded having to do the research, rethink what I wanted to say, or go through the revision process.  In the end, I was happy with what I created, but sometimes the journey to get there was a bit windy.

### 9. ChatGPT lives up to its hype, at least for productivity  
I'd have to imagine that writing without ChatGPT was way harder a few years ago.  To that end, the tool is living up to its name.  I found it super helpful, especially when it came to learning deep technical topics quickly.  I was amazed how fast it surfaced (mostly) relevant information; as such, it helped speed up my research process.  

### 10. Finding the middle ground  
I knew when I started writing that I wanted it to be more substantial than a short post on LinkedIn, but I also did not want it to become a full-blown research papaer.  With the help of the lesson 3, I think I managed to stay within a happy middle ground between these two ends.  It also helped that I had a target to publish a post once a month.  I recognize there are people who write pieces much more often than that (huge kudos!), but I felt I could be consistent with once a month.  However, I think I will have to switch up this strategy a bit going forward.

11. Most surprising thing about healthcare

## What's next
As I'm embarking on a new journey soon, I have an ever-growing list of topics I would like to explore in the next year.  I fear that due to time limitation, I may have to change up the form - i.e., less well-researched posts.  In no particular order, here are topics of interest:

- Tutorial: building a GPT from scratch
- Tutorial: CNNs with images
- Explainable AI for healthcare
- Why are healthcare systems consistenly ranked top in Switz, Aus
- AI evaluation frameworks from CHAI, Health AI partnership
- How can we educate all healthcare stakeholders to better understand AI
- Generative AI for missing healthcare data
- Patient education as a prime use case for generative AI
- Creativity vs. Consistency in AI models (for drug discovery, rare disease)
- 

## Conclusion
I've really enjoyed my year where I could dedicate substantial time to write.  

## References
+ <https://www.politico.com/news/2024/03/24/who-pays-when-your-doctors-ai-goes-rogue-00148447>