---
layout: post
title:  "Emerging tech's value in a time of healthcare verticalization"
author: sandy
categories: [ healthcare, economics ]
image: assets/images/2024-01/shutterstock_170931503_license_resize.png
description: "Technology's value in a time of healthcare verticalization"
featured: false
hidden: false
---

Continuing on from my previous post on emerging tech's value in healthcare, I was intrigued to review EHR adoption across other countries.  As I wrote about in a previous [post](https://slsu0424.github.io/switchover-disruptions-true-cost-ai-scribe), EHRs are still a painpoint for many of its users, despite the fact that [96% of hospitals](https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/ehrs/96-of-us-hospitals-have-ehrs-but-barriers-remain-to-interoperability-onc-says.html) have them.  Of course, I am as excited as everyone else at generative AI's potential to reduce this administrative workload for clinical staff.  But is this emerging tech significant enough to make a meaningful impact?

## EHR use in the US vs. abroad: Key takeaways

A 2020 JAMA [report](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/2774129) set out to compare clinician usage of EHRs in the United States and in other countries.  The report studied EHR metadata of 371 health systems in the US and abroad.  I will focus on the paper's key findings and discussion, and its implications from a technology perspective.

Key findings on US clinicians:
1. Spent more time per day using the EHR
2. Received more system-generated messages
3. Wrote a higher proportion of automatically generated notes
4. Spent more time using the EHR after hours

Discussion:
1. Recent [research](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/quality-u-s-healthcare-system-compare-countries/) has shown that US-based health care organizations are not better than their country counterparts in most process quality measures during care delivery.  Its unlikely that information technology could help improve these measures significantly, such as reducing rates of medication error.
2. The additional time spent by US clinicians on in-basket messages may reflect policy-driven differences in volume of messages received. The Meaningful Use incentive program in the US mandated both secure messaging with patients and electronic prescribing, resulting in nearly universal adoption of those capabilities by US health systems.
3. Additional time in the orders activity may reflect higher levels of clinical decision support, which may improve safety, albeit potentially at the cost of burnout and alert fatigue
4. Factors such as a multipayer billing environment, in which clinicians rely on documentation to ensure their claims are not denied, as well as Meaningful Use and incorporation of quality measurement and administrative functions may have contributed to the results.
5. Most ambulatory practices contract with multiple payers and must be prepared to submit clinical documentation to substantiate reimbursable services, and they may opt to overdocument to guard against rejected claims. 
- Similarly, US clinicians may overdocument if they are concerned that they may need to defend themselves from malpractice claims. 


--
1. 
- A portion of clinician EHR work was associated with contextual factors unique to national health systems
- Although some EHR features provide considerable value to patients and clinicians, quality of care delivered in the US is unlikely to be substantially better than that in the other countries examined in this study
- Furthermore, although health outcomes are associated with many factors ranging from technical clinical skills to social determinants, such as poverty, racism, and lack of access, recent research has shown that US-based health care organizations are not better than their counterparts in other countries at achieving high performance in most process quality measures during care delivery that information technology could help improve, such as reducing rates of medication error

2. 
- US clinicians spend more time on orders may be the need for diagnostic association, a billing requirement in the US that is absent from most non-US billing practices; alternatively, US clinicians may need to enter individual electronic orders for low-risk tasks, such as ear irrigation or immunizations.
- additional time spent by US clinicians on in-basket messages may reflect policy-driven differences in volume of messages received. The Meaningful Use incentive program in the US mandated both secure messaging with patients and electronic prescribing, resulting in nearly universal adoption of those capabilities by US health systems. 
- US clinicians also spent more time working in the Notes function despite using more automatically generated text. Previous studies have shown that the length of notes is considerably longer in the US,26 which may illustrate the implication of greater use of automatically generated text for nonclinical purposes such as billing, quality reporting, documentation to minimize legal liability, and other administrative tasks.

3.
- Some EHR areas in which US clinicians spend more time likely deliver value to patients, such as secure messaging, which patients may prefer to alternatives. 
- Other functions may improve safety and save time elsewhere in the care delivery process, such as e-prescribing, which was considered EHR work for US clinicians in this study but was less likely to be observed among non-US clinicians who may write prescriptions manually
- Additional time in the orders activity may reflect higher levels of clinical decision support, which may improve safety, albeit potentially at the cost of burnout and alert fatigue

4.
- US clinicians used EHRs in different ways compared with their non-US peers, suggesting that at least some of the time burden was associated with nontechnical aspects of EHR implementation that were specific to US market characteristics such as differences in workflow or policy. 
- Factors such as a multipayer billing environment, in which clinicians rely on documentation to ensure their claims are not denied, as well as Meaningful Use and incorporation of quality measurement and administrative functions may have contributed to the results.

5 (last). 
- Most ambulatory practices contract with multiple payers and must be prepared to submit clinical documentation to substantiate reimbursable services, and they may opt to overdocument to guard against rejected claims. 
- Similarly, US clinicians may overdocument if they are concerned that they may need to defend themselves from malpractice claims. 
-In our qualitative interview with Chris Hayes, MD, a chief medical information officer in a non-US health system (email and telephone communication, May 2020), he indicated that, despite working in a fee-for-service reimbursement setting, there is no need to document anything that is not relevant to clinical care because medical claims are rarely challenged. Although the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has clarified documentation requirements, aggressive steps toward reducing inefficiencies in reimbursement are needed.

## Considerations for the technologist

## Conclusion

This short analysis helped me better understand the external forces driving the ever-increasing costs of healthcare in the United States.  Despite the technological prowess of the US, our country still falls behind in terms of health outcomes and spend.  I suspect that if we continue to see more consolidations, these tech innovations could play a more important role in health outcomes.  

I am also interested in looking at similar tech adoption in other developed countries, and will cover this in a future post.  


## References
+ <https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/u-s-life-expectancy-compare-countries>
+ <https://finance.yahoo.com/news/15-countries-produce-best-software-222422955.html>
+ <https://www.economist.com/business/2023/10/08/who-profits-most-from-americas-baffling-health-care-system>
+ <https://rockinst.org/blog/a-mid-year-update-on-2023-healthcare-trends>
+ <https://medcitynews.com/2023/04/kaiser-permanente-acquire-geisinger-hospital-merger>
+ <https://www.forbes.com/sites/brucejapsen/2023/02/22/amazon-achieves-closing-of-one-medical-deal-officially-entering-doctor-clinic-business>
+ <https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2023/oct/high-us-health-care-spending-where-is-it-all-going>
+ <https://www.bain.com/insights/getting-the-most-out-of-generative-ai-in-healthcare>
+ <https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertpearl/2023/05/31/what-kaisers-acquisition-of-geisinger-means-for-us-all>